Add Solidity 0.8.35 release announcement (#200)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2026-04-29-solidity-0.8.35-release-announcement.md

## Notable Features and Changes

### `erc7201` Comptime Builtin

Solidity 0.8.35 introduces a new builtin function:

```solidity
function erc7201(string memory id) returns (uint)
```

It computes the base storage slot for a namespace string using the formula defined in [ERC-7201](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7201), equivalent to `keccak256(keccak256(id) - 1) & ~0xff`.
ERC-7201 formalizes the practice of placing a contract's state behind a hashed namespace to avoid storage collisions in proxy-based and diamond-style upgradeable patterns.

The builtin pairs naturally with the [`layout at` storage layout specifier](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.35/contracts.html#custom-storage-layout) introduced in 0.8.29 and extended in 0.8.31:

```solidity
contract MyContract layout at erc7201("openzeppelin.storage.MyContract") {
    uint256 x;
    uint256 y;
}
```

What makes `erc7201` special is that **it is the first comptime builtin in the language**.
Until now, Solidity's comptime evaluator only handled arithmetic on rational number literals.

> Existing builtins like `keccak256` do get folded by the codegen at the optimization stage; you get the gas savings, but not the type-system benefit of being usable in a comptime context such as a layout specifier.

Reviewer: Reading it now, I'm not sure if "folded" will be clear to everyone. We could say "constant-folded". Or maybe just link to Wikipedia?

```suggestion
Existing builtins like `keccak256` do get [folded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constant_folding) by the codegen at the optimization stage; you get the gas savings, but not the type-system benefit of being usable in a comptime context such as a layout specifier.
```

#### Recorded in Metadata

Whether a contract was compiled with experimental mode enabled is now recorded in both JSON and CBOR metadata.
The CBOR `experimental` field, which previously only signalled experimental pragmas in the source, has been broadened to cover this.
This also closes a known gap: targeting an unreleased EVM version used to produce experimental bytecode without flipping the flag.

### Experimental SSA CFG Code Generator

Solidity 0.8.35 ships an experimental new EVM backend for the IR pipeline.
It generates bytecode from an [SSA-form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single-assignment_form) [control-flow graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-flow_graph) representation of the program (an "SSA CFG"), with a precomputed stack layout that the backend shuffles the EVM stack to match.

Why we are building it: the IR pipeline has two long-standing pain points, stack-too-deep errors and slow compilation, and an SSA-based backend addresses both.

> Stack-too-deep [remained the most commonly reported recurring issue](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2026/04/15/solidity-developer-survey-2025-results/#pain-points) in our [2025 Developer Survey](https://soliditylang.org/survey-2025/), and via-IR compilation has long been measurably slower than the legacy pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stack-too-deep [remained the most commonly reported recurring issue](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2026/04/15/solidity-developer-survey-2025-results/#pain-points) in our [2025 Developer Survey](https://soliditylang.org/survey-2025/), and compilation via IR has long been measurably slower than the evmasm pipeline.
```

> The current Yul-to-EVM code transform relies on heuristics that struggle with deeply nested expressions and complex control flow, and the same algorithmic issues contribute to compile time.

Reviewer: "compile time" sounds very odd to me in this context.

```suggestion
The current Yul-to-EVM code transform relies on heuristics that struggle with deeply nested expressions and complex control flow, and the same algorithmic issues contribute to long compilation times.
```

These are warnings, not errors. Existing code continues to compile; you have a window to rename affected declarations before 0.9.0 turns the warnings into errors.

### `--revert-strings strip` and Custom Errors

`--revert-strings strip` (`revertStrings: "strip"` in Standard JSON) is a gas-saving option: bytecode is smaller without revert reason strings, and reverts still happen.
The implicit assumption was that returndata is a way to deliver a nice message to a user, not a piece of structured data that another contract should depend on.

[`require(condition, CustomError(...))`](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2024/05/21/solidity-0.8.26-release-announcement/#requires-with-custom-errors) complicates that picture, because a custom error encodes structured data via its selector.
Until 0.8.35, the IR pipeline (`--via-ir`) was stripping the custom-error argument of `require` along with strings, so a failed `require` reverted with empty error data instead of the encoded custom error.

> The legacy pipeline behaved correctly.

Reviewer: The structure data is not just in the selector. Also, saying that the legacy behaved correctly somewhat conflicts with the later statement that it could have been fixed either way :)

```suggestion
[`require(condition, CustomError(...))`](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2024/05/21/solidity-0.8.26-release-announcement/#requires-with-custom-errors) complicates that picture, because a custom error encodes structured data.
Until 0.8.35, the IR pipeline (`--via-ir`) was stripping the custom-error argument of `require` along with strings, so a failed `require` reverted with empty error data instead of the encoded custom error.
The evmasm pipeline behaved differently.
```

---
title: 'Solidity 0.8.35 Release Announcement'
date: '2026-04-29'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

We are excited to announce the release of the Solidity Compiler [v0.8.35](https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.35)!

> This release introduces our first compile-time builtin, [`erc7201`](#erc7201-compile-time-builtin), which computes the base slot of an ERC-7201 namespaced storage layout from its namespace string.

Reviewer: I'd omit the bit about comptime from the intro to emphasize the layout more because that's much more relevant to users. It being comptime is somewhat notable, but secondary.

It also formalizes how experimental features are exposed to users: in-development functionality is now gated behind a new top-level `--experimental` flag, with [a documented lifecycle and a canonical list](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.35/using-the-compiler.html#experimental-mode) of which features are currently considered experimental.

> The first major code-generation feature shipped under this new lifecycle is an experimental SSA-form control-flow graph (SSA CFG) code generator that we expect to be the long-term answer to stack-too-deep errors in the IR pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first major code-generation feature shipped under this new lifecycle is an experimental SSA-form control-flow graph (SSA CFG) code generator that we expect to be the long-term answer to long compilation times as well as stack-too-deep errors in the IR pipeline.
```

> We are also reorganizing the `ethdebug` outputs to match our usual conventions and decoupling them from binary compilation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also reorganizes the `ethdebug` outputs to match our usual conventions and decouples them from binary compilation.
```

> It also reorganizes the `ethdebug` outputs to match our usual conventions and decouples them from binary compilation.

Reviewer: The bit about ethdebug is also not notable enough to be in the intro. The changes are mostly organizational. They make the interface more consistent, but the feature is experimental and no one is using it yet.

I'd rather highlight the change in behavior of `--revert-strings strip` instead.

Some of these features were previously available in the [v0.8.35-pre.1 pre-release](https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.35-pre.1) we shared back in March.

## Notable Features and Changes

### `erc7201` Compile-Time Builtin

Solidity 0.8.35 introduces a new builtin function:

```solidity
function erc7201(string memory id) returns (uint)
```

It computes the base storage slot for a namespace string using the formula defined in [ERC-7201](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7201), equivalent to `keccak256(keccak256(id) - 1) & ~0xff`.
ERC-7201 formalizes the practice of placing a contract's state behind a hashed namespace to avoid storage collisions in proxy-based and diamond-style upgradeable patterns.

The builtin pairs naturally with the [`layout at` storage layout specifier](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.35/contracts.html#custom-storage-layout) introduced in 0.8.29 and extended in 0.8.31:

```solidity
contract MyContract layout at erc7201("openzeppelin.storage.MyContract") {
    uint256 x;
    uint256 y;
}
```

> What makes `erc7201` special is that **it is the first compile-time builtin in the language**.

Reviewer: I think we can start introducing "comptime" as our official term for this.

```suggestion
What makes `erc7201` special is that **it is the first comptime builtin in the language**.
```

It will eventually make its way to the docs as we decided recently (https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/issues/16422) but it's fine to use it in blog posts already.

> Until now, Solidity's compile-time evaluator only handled arithmetic on rational number literals; existing builtins like `keccak256` are not constant-foldable.

Reviewer: I'd make the distinction that `keccak256()` does get folded, but only in the codegen, which makes it unusable in the comptime context in the language (which practically means that it cannot be used in layout specifiers). So we get the gas benefits of folding, but not type-system benefits.

> `erc7201` is the first whose result can be used wherever a constant expression is required: as the base slot in `layout at`, as an array length, in a `uint constant` initializer, and so on.

Reviewer: I'd especially make the distinction between "constant" and "comptime" here:
```suggestion
`erc7201` is the first whose result can be used wherever a comptime expression is required: as the base slot in `layout at` or as an array length.
```

You could still mention constant initializers or runtime context in general, but in this context the builtin is evaluated at runtime so it costs gas. I.e. `uint constant x = 2 * erc7201("x")` does not get folded during compilation (but or course still does later, in the optimizer).

This directly addresses one of the limitations we [flagged in 0.8.31](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2025/12/03/solidity-0.8.31-release-announcement/#constants-in-storage-layout-specifiers), and we expect more such builtins as we work toward a more capable compile-time evaluator.

### Formalizing the Experimental Feature Process

> Past releases have shipped a number of in-development features through a mix of ad-hoc CLI flags and `pragma experimental` directives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Past releases have shipped a number of in-development features that could be enabled through a mix of ad-hoc CLI flags and `pragma experimental` directives.
```

There was no consistent way for a user to know they were opting into something unstable, and the metadata signaling was patchy.

With 0.8.35 we are formalizing this.
The full process is described in the new [Experimental Mode docs page](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.35/using-the-compiler.html#experimental-mode); the key user-facing changes are below.

#### The `--experimental` Flag

Using any experimental feature now requires the new top-level `--experimental` flag, or the analogous boolean `settings.experimental` field in Standard JSON input.
`--experimental` is a master toggle: it does not enable any specific feature on its own, but is required for any of the per-feature flags or pragmas to be accepted.

> The current list of experimental features, their IDs and the flags or pragmas that drive each one is maintained in the [Experimental Mode docs page](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.35/using-the-compiler.html#experimental-mode).

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth mentioning, but an interesting tidbit is that this new system did not come out of nowhere. It's the extension of what we were implicitly using already, just not consistently. Some of the CLI flags used to have an `experimental` prefix (`--experimental-via-ir`, `--experimental-eof-version`, etc.) that was removed when we marked them as stable. So e.g. `--experimental-via-ir` became `--via-ir` in 0.8.13. The new flag is pretty much the same thing but less annoying and more explicit.

Author: chose to leave it out

Using any of those without `--experimental` is now a hard error.
This is a backwards-incompatible change for users who were already passing the affected flags directly: they will need to add `--experimental` (or set `settings.experimental: true` in JSON input) to keep their builds working.

> We think the explicit opt-in is worth the migration cost: experimental features come with **no backwards-compatibility guarantees and may change in breaking ways even in non-breaking releases**, and we want users to be making that tradeoff knowingly.

Reviewer: It's backwards compatible. The change does not affect any non-experimental feature and the experimental ones are explicitly excluded from compatibility guarantees.

What's potentially questionable is just that it may not have been clear to users that what they were using was experimental, because we did not communicate that clearly until now.

#### Recorded in Metadata

Whether a contract was compiled with experimental mode enabled is now recorded in both JSON and CBOR metadata.
The CBOR `experimental` field, which previously only signalled experimental pragmas in the source, has been broadened to cover this.
This also closes a known gap: targeting an unreleased EVM version used to produce experimental bytecode without flipping the flag.

#### Experimental `@future` EVM Version

This release also introduces a new EVM version selector, `@future`, that sits one slot above the current default (`osaka`).
As of 0.8.35 it does not gate any new functionality compared to `osaka`, but it gives us a stable target to land EVM features that are still in flux at the protocol level (e.g. opcodes from upcoming hardforks) before committing to a named version.

> Selecting it via `--evm-version @future` requires `--experimental`, and doing so sets the `experimental` flag in metadata.

Reviewer: I'm on the fence on whether it makes sense to mention this. Initially @nikola-matic did not even want to have it in the changelog :)

Probably does not hurt, but it's also just a technicality that makes testing easier for us. I doubt people will have any practical use of this.

> ### Experimental SSA CFG Code Generator

Reviewer: This should be higher. It's much more important than `--experimental`. I mean, it depends on the flag, so maybe it still makes sense to have it after, but it comes first in the order of importance.

Author: I will leave it after `--experimental` since it makes more sense to introduce it first.

> The first major code-generation feature shipped under the new experimental lifecycle is an SSA-form control-flow graph (SSA CFG) code generator: a new EVM backend in the IR pipeline that produces bytecode by walking a static-single-assignment representation of each basic block, using a precomputed stack layout, and shuffling the EVM stack to match.

Reviewer 2: This part is factually a bit off. I'd augment as follows:

```suggestion
The first major code-generation feature shipped under the new experimental lifecycle is a code generator consuming SSA-form control-flow graphs (SSA CFGs): a new EVM backend in the IR pipeline that produces bytecode by traversing CFGs subject to the SSA property, using a top-down precomputed stack layout, and shuffling the EVM stack to match.
```

> The first major code-generation feature shipped under the new experimental lifecycle is a code generator consuming SSA-form control-flow graphs (SSA CFGs): a new EVM backend in the IR pipeline that produces bytecode by traversing CFGs subject to the SSA property, using a top-down precomputed stack layout, and shuffling the EVM stack to match.

Reviewer: I think this section may be a bit dense for our audience. It could use links for some of these terms and maybe a bit of simplification. Overall, we may be better off focusing more on what the status of the feature is and what the visible effects are for a contract developer, leaving technicals for a detailed blog post.

> Why we are building it: stack-too-deep has been a long-standing pain point in Solidity, hitting users on both the legacy and IR pipelines.

Reviewer 2: also we want to improve the compiler performance

In our [2025 Developer Survey](https://soliditylang.org/survey-2025/), it [remained the most commonly reported recurring issue](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2026/04/15/solidity-developer-survey-2025-results/#pain-points).
The current Yul-to-EVM code transform that drives the IR pipeline relies on heuristics that struggle with deeply nested expressions and complex control flow, and an SSA-based backend gives us a much stronger foundation for stack scheduling and optimization.
We see it as the realistic long-term path to making stack-too-deep a non-issue in the IR pipeline.

Enable it with `--experimental --via-ssa-cfg` on the command line, or `settings.experimental: true` together with `settings.viaSSACFG: true` in Standard JSON.
Both imply `--via-ir`.

> The implementation is still maturing. Two limitations to be aware of:

Reviewer: I think we should be much clearer about what is not included. The way this is written now, people will assume it's much more than it really is.

Optimizer, spilling, performance, being still developed in external mode. All of these should be prominently mentioned.

> - The codegen is exercised against the full external-contract semantic test suite on every PR, but it is not yet the default for `--via-ir`. We want to gather gas data on real contracts before promoting it.

Reviewer 2: even if we have gas data, it will not be the default right away. we will want to review, fuzz, test it, perhaps have it externally audited

still good to emphasize that it's not the default, though, i think :)

> - Cases that exhaust the stack scheduler still surface as internal compiler errors rather than graceful "stack too deep" diagnostics.

Reviewer 2: ... or stack to memory spilling

- `--ethdebug-resources`: the `ethdebug/format/info/resources` schema (requires only analysis).
- `--ethdebug-compilation`: the `compilation` key from the same schema (no compilation needed).
- `--ethdebug-program`: per-contract `ethdebug/format/program` for the creation bytecode.
- `--ethdebug-program-runtime`: same, for the deployed bytecode.

The Standard JSON ethdebug output has been reorganized along the same lines: the previous top-level `ethdebug` key has been split into `ethdebug.resources` and `ethdebug.compilation`, and per-contract program outputs are now selected via the standard `evm.bytecode.ethdebug` and `evm.deployedBytecode.ethdebug` keys instead of being lumped under a separate top-level blob.

The main user-visible improvement: ethdebug outputs no longer force a full binary compilation.
Previously, requesting any ethdebug data would trigger bytecode generation even when bytecode was not in the output selection; each output now declares only the pipeline stages it actually needs.

> ethdebug remains experimental and now requires `--experimental` like the others.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit too prominent and too detailed. It's almost as long as the SSA CFG bit :) These changes are really not very interesting to users. If you want to include it, I'd put it last. Or make it more of a general update on the status of ethdebug with only a brief mention of a change that makes the interface more uniform.

### Deprecation Warnings for Upcoming 0.9.0 Keywords

Continuing the [deprecation work started in 0.8.31](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2025/12/03/solidity-0.8.31-release-announcement/#feature-deprecations), this release adds warnings for identifiers we plan to promote to keywords in 0.9.0.
Where 0.8.31's deprecations were about features being removed, this batch is about names being claimed.

> Solidity declarations using `at`, `error`, `layout`, `super`, `this`, or `transient` will now emit a warning.

Reviewer: `leave` is being reserved at Solidity level as well.

We generally keep Yul keywords reserved in Solidity too (the reverse is not true though).

> In Yul (standalone or inline assembly), `leave` will become a Yul keyword, while `basefee`, `blobbasefee`, `blobhash`, `clz`, `mcopy`, `memoryguard`, `prevrandao`, `tload`, and `tstore` will become Yul reserved identifiers, cleaning up the per-EVM-version exceptions list that has accumulated as new opcodes were introduced.

Reviewer: Might be good to clarify that all of these are names of Yul builtins and we keep those reserved as a general rule. The fact that we have a growing list of exceptions is the result of the 0.8.x release cycle being unusually long. They are waiting for 0.9 due to our standard backwards-compatibility guarantees.

These are warnings, not errors. Existing code continues to compile; you have a window to rename affected declarations before 0.9.0 turns the warnings into errors.

### `--revert-strings strip` Preserves Custom Errors

> `--revert-strings strip` (or `revertStrings: "strip"` in Standard JSON) is meant to strip user-supplied revert reason strings from compiled bytecode.

Reviewer: This should mention that the bug is specifically the discrepancy between the pipelines and not the fact that errors were being stripped. The discrepancy could be fixed either way.

It would make sense for the option to strip the errors because it was meant primarily as a gas saving measure and works on the assumption that the revert is what matters and returndata is just a way to deliver a nice message for the user rather than return structured data that control flow should depend on.

We decided in favor of not stripping errors primarily because we do not want to extend the functionality further. The current name suggests it's only about strings so a rename would be in order, with all its consequences (backwards-compatibility, deprecations, etc.). Perhaps higher granularity would also be warranted so that users can explicitly choose what to strip. Making it work only for strings was much simpler.

We also discovered that with custom errors there is a tendency to treat returndata as something more reliable than just an error message (we can link to that ERC we found).

In the IR pipeline (`--via-ir`), it was also stripping the custom-error argument of [`require(condition, CustomError(...))`](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2024/05/21/solidity-0.8.26-release-announcement/#requires-with-custom-errors), so a failed `require` reverted with empty error data instead of the encoded custom error.

> The legacy pipeline was unaffected.

Reviewer: An important point is that this only affected `require()`, not `revert`.

The bug has been present since `require(bool, error)` was introduced in 0.8.26 and is fixed in 0.8.35.

> The documentation and `--help` output for `--revert-strings` have also been clarified to state explicitly that `strip` does not remove custom errors.

Reviewer: Seems a bit weird to mention something like this.

```suggestion
```

## Full Changelog

### Language Features
* General: Add a builtin that computes the base slot of a storage namespace using the `erc7201` formula from ERC-7201.
* NameAndTypeResolver: Warn about identifiers selected for future promotion to Solidity keywords.

> * Yul Analyzer: Warn about identifiers selected for future promotion to Yul keywords.

Reviewer: This bit was updated in the PR.

I'd suggest just copying it over again once https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/pull/16645 is merged. I found some issues in the ethdebug-related entries as well so more things will likely change.

### Experimental SSA CFG Code Generator

Solidity 0.8.35 ships an experimental new EVM backend for the IR pipeline.

> It generates bytecode from an [SSA-form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single-assignment_form) [control-flow graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-flow_graph) representation of the program (an "SSA CFG"), with a precomputed stack layout that the backend shuffles the EVM stack to match.

Reviewer 2: Tiny nit, the program/contract is actually a collection of SSA CFGs
